Docs: adding pdc support documentation (#1800)
grafana/plugin-tools: docusaurus/docs/how-to-guides/data-source-plugins/add-support-for-pdc.md

---
id: add-support-for-pdc
title: Add support for Private Datasource Connect (PDC)

> description: Add support for private datasource connect (PDC) functionality Grafana plugin development.

Reviewer: maybe?

```suggestion
description: Add support for private datasource connect (PDC) functionality to your Grafana plugin.
```

keywords:
  - grafana
  - plugins
  - plugin
  - pdc
  - private datasource connect
---

# Add support for private datasource connect (PDC)

## What is Private Data Source Connect?

Private data source connect, or PDC, is a way for you to establish a private, secured connection between a Grafana Cloud instance, or stack, and data sources secured within a private network.

Read more about it [here](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana-cloud/connect-externally-hosted/private-data-source-connect/).

### When NOT to support PDC

> PDC is a Grafana Cloud - only solution, so if your datasource is not available in Grafana Cloud, there is not much benefit from implementing PDC support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PDC is a Grafana Cloud - only solution, so if your datasource is not available in Grafana Cloud, there is not much benefit to implementing PDC support.
```

# Adding PDC to a data source

> PDC support must be integrated in each data source because each plugin in Grafana is responsible for establishing its own connection to the target data source. While Grafana stores the proxy configuration details (such as proxy_address, server_address, and certificates) in its config, each plugin consumes this configuration in a different way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PDC support must be integrated in each data source because each plugin in Grafana is responsible for establishing its own connection to the target data source. While Grafana stores the proxy configuration details (such as `proxy_address`, `server_address`, and certificates) in its config, each plugin consumes this configuration in a different way.
```

> grafana-plugin-sdk provides an httpClientProvider that automatically uses the proxy configuration, making it easier for plugins that use the HTTP client from the plugin SDK to implement PDC support. However, plugins that use other types of clients require more manual adjustments to use the proxy configuration.

Reviewer: Can we add a link to the repo for the plugin-sdk here?

Author: Done https://github.com/grafana/plugin-tools/pull/1800/commits/07d9a315a6a37023967f26ae6df1b667ae1dab1e

> grafana-plugin-sdk provides an httpClientProvider that automatically uses the proxy configuration, making it easier for plugins that use the HTTP client from the plugin SDK to implement PDC support. However, plugins that use other types of clients require more manual adjustments to use the proxy configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
grafana-plugin-sdk provides an `httpClientProvider` that automatically uses the proxy configuration, making it easier for plugins that use the HTTP client from the plugin SDK to implement PDC support. However, plugins that use other types of clients require more manual adjustments to use the proxy configuration.
```

## Prerequisites

:::note

> Note: It is not possible to add PDC support to frontend data sources because connection to the proxy is established from the backend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: It is not possible to add PDC support to frontend data sources because the connection to the proxy is established from the backend.
```

:::

> - [`grafana-plugin-sdk`](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go) version > [`0.229.0`](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/releases/tag/v0.229.0) is needed to get the latest changes compatible with the remote plugins. Always a good practice to keep this as up to date as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`grafana-plugin-sdk`](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go) version > [`0.229.0`](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/releases/tag/v0.229.0) is needed to get the latest changes compatible with the remote plugins. It is good practice to keep this as up to date as possible.
```

- Grafana version > `10.0.0`

## Overview

Here’s the brief overview of the steps you need to take to add PDC to the data source plugin:

- Update the plugin frontend configuration section to include a toggle for enabling SOCKS proxying

> - Update the data source plugin’s backend to use a SOCKS proxy transport when configured to do so

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Update the plugin backend to use a SOCKS proxy transport when configured to do so
```

- `HTTPClientOptions(ctx)` reads and creates an HTTP client configuration based on the context passed from the Grafana process.
- `httpclient.New(opts)` calls `GetTransport()`. [Transport](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/blob/main/backend/httpclient/http_client.go#L90-L94) object is the one responsible for handling TLS, proxies, and other configurations within [the standard package](https://pkg.go.dev/net/http#hdr-Clients_and_Transports).
- `GetTransport() uses ConfigureSecureSocksHTTPProxy()` to wrap the `Transport` object into socks5 proxy with TLS
- `ConfigureSecureSocksHTTPProxy()` calls `NewSecureSocksProxyContextDialer()` which creates a socks proxy dialer.

> This will make every request go first through the proxy (and therefore, the PDC agent), and then reach the data source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will proxy every request from the client through the proxy (and therefore through PDC), and then reach the data source.
```

```go
func NewDatasource(ctx context.Context, s backend.DataSourceInstanceSettings) (instancemgmt.Instance, error) {
    opts, err := s.HTTPClientOptions(ctx)
    if err != nil {
        return nil, err
    }
    httpClient, err := httpclient.New(opts)
    if err != nil {
        return nil, err
    }
    return &Datasource{HTTPClient: httpClient}, nil
}

```

Here are a few examples of how it was done for some data sources:

- [BigQuery](https://github.com/grafana/google-bigquery-datasource/pull/193/) \- an external library was used to connect to datasource in those cases, but it allowed swapping the default HTTP client. So all we had to do to configure the PDC proxy was to pass a client from the SDK.
- [VictoriaMetrics Metrics Datasource](https://github.com/VictoriaMetrics/victoriametrics-datasource/releases/tag/v0.15.1)

### Non-HTTP client

We have a couple of options here, depending on what is available in the data source codebase:

#### Override the Dialer

> Some packages expose means to set the [Dialer](https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x/net/proxy#Dialer) for the client transport. Set the `dialer` in a client with the one returned by `NewSecureSocksProxyContextDialer`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some packages expose a way to set the [Dialer](https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x/net/proxy#Dialer) for the client transport. Set the `dialer` in a client with the one returned by `NewSecureSocksProxyContextDialer`.
```

Overriding the dialer is less risky than overriding the whole Transport, as we’re changing fewer things.

For example, our PostgreSQL client allows replacing the default dialer with one that supports secure SOCKS proxying ([link to the code](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/da24ad06bd90b6caeaa7ad553e0063f62b0b6c5c/pkg/tsdb/grafana-postgresql-datasource/postgres.go#L71-L80)):

```go
if proxyClient.SecureSocksProxyEnabled() {
socksDialer, err := proxyClient.NewSecureSocksProxyContextDialer()
if err != nil {
logger.Error("postgres proxy creation failed", "error", err)
return nil, nil, fmt.Errorf("postgres proxy creation failed")
}

d := newPostgresProxyDialer(socksDialer)

// update the postgres dialer with the proxy dialer
connector.Dialer(d)
}

> ```

Reviewer: I don't think this is indented?

Author: Yep, done https://github.com/grafana/plugin-tools/pull/1800/commits/07d9a315a6a37023967f26ae6df1b667ae1dab1e

1. Once tested and confirmed you can go on with making this a regular release and submitting it for review

### Simulating / Testing locally with microsocks

In this case, we will use [microsocks](https://github.com/rofl0r/microsocks), which is an OSS Socks5 server. This will not be the same as how Grafana runs in our cloud, but it shows a simpler way to do this without any internal dependency.

Steps to run this method:

1. Install [microsocks](https://github.com/rofl0r/microsocks) . It can be done with \`brew install microsocks\`
1. Run microsocks \-i 127.0.0.1 \-p 5555\. This will start up the socks server and await for connections.
1. Run Grafana with this configuration.

   ```shell
   [feature_toggles]
   enable = secureSocksDSProxyEnabled

   [secure_socks_datasource_proxy]
   enabled = true
   proxy_address = localhost:5555
   allow_insecure = true
   ```

1. Create a new instance of the data source that you want to test. You should see the "Secure SOCKS Proxy" configuration section, with a toggle to Enable it.
1. Once enabled, click "Save & Test" and Grafana shows a message saying that the connection was successful.

> 1. In the microsocks logs you should see something similar to client[5] 127.0.0.1: connected to localhost:3306, meaning that the connection was established via the server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the microsocks logs you should see something similar to `client[5] 127.0.0.1: connected to <target>`, meaning that the connection was established via the server.
```
